PWIC Returnship Panel and Workshop
Saturday, April 27, 2019 at 11:00 AM – 1 PM
Microsoft Building 30
The event was free and open to non – Pakistanis as well.
Agenda

PWiC introduction
Returnship Panel discussion   
Returnship Plan & Resources
Returnship Workshop

PWiC Introduction
Pakistani Women in Computing (PWiC) is a global community of women in computing and technology fields and their allies hailing from Pakistan to increase community’s global reach and visibility to foster growth and retention of women in the STEM fields.
 
Our vision is: Connect, Learn and Grow Together
 
Returnship Panel Discussion

The panel consisted of
·       Beenish Ali - Senior Consultant at Microsoft
·       Fauzia Aslam - Engineering Program Manager at Electronic Arts
·       Farah Khurram - Software Engineer at Microsoft
·       Fatima Khakwani - Global Lead at Amazon
·       Sarwat Ismail - Panel Moderator - PWiC Seattle Growth Lead and Software Developer at Microsoft Program Outline

Question # 1
Moderator: When did you know you should leave your job?
Fatima: My maternal instincts told me that it was time and I was having a very hard time finding a good daycare/nanny for my kids.
Farah: I was missing the bonding time with my kids.
Fauzia: I evaluated all pros and cons and decided that it works for my family that I leave for some time.
Beenish: I was very blessed that our financial situation was such that if I left the job it wouldn’t affect the family. It was my decision and I was very happy with it.
 
 
Question #2
Moderator: Now tell me what was that moment when you decide that you want to/ need to go back to work?
Beenish: I came back to work for my personal happiness. I was content being a mother, but I felt somewhere between kids’ school and home routine I was losing myself.  I had to go back for my happiness and personal growth.
Fauzia: My kids were the reason I left, and my kids are the reason I came back. I want to be the role model for my daughters.
Farah: I came back for my mother. She inspired me to be the contributing member of the community. She belonged to an uneducated family, but she persisted, got herself a degree and started working. She fought against all odds and educated her daughters. Not working meant I was throwing away her legacy. I couldn’t do that.
Fatima: My family is not a typical traditional family where you get dadi key haath ka halwa and ammi ka khana. Women usually don’t play this role. We are through and through feminist flag bearers. So, once when I was visiting Pakistan, we were sitting on the table and our cook got some roti (bread), I said to my dad, “You should come to Seattle I will make garam garam rotis for you”. He slammed his fork on the table and said “Fatima we raised you to become the Prime Minister and you are making chappatis- what are you doing with your life?”. After some soul searching, I felt I had to drop my profession as the rotimatic and go in the career I was supposed to be. I enrolled in UW, did my graduation on top of class; with three young kids at home. My family was my real motivation.
 
Question # 3
Moderator: What steps you took to come back?
Fauzia: I am a planner. I planned to a tee. I wrote down my skillset. It helped me see my path. I gave my self a plan. I knew the courses I had to take to improve my skills. I volunteered, I networked, I showed up at every event, I pushed myself till I was good at it. Finding a career is a full-time job. You need to plan.
Farah: All the things Fauzia said and on top of that I had a candid discussion with my spouse before I planned my returnship. We discussed about the changes we will have to make in our lives. He needs to chip. I talked and trained my kids (CPR, 911 emergency care etc).
Also, remember you don’t have to make your own network, you can use anyone’s network. Use your husband’s network, use network of your friends. I used my husbands network intensively and it worked!
Fatima: Never go to anyone and say I am looking for a job or give me a job. Ask for information. Have a cup of coffee with them and really put effort to understand the company. But treat it like a real interview. Remember! everyone is hiring but it takes away the pressure of the interview if it is over a cup of coffee. So do no mistake, prepare ahead, do your homework. End the conversation with a thank- you email and always follow through. Also, volunteer as much as you can. Volunteering can fill the gap in your resume. Job fairs, local conferences are also wonderful resources.
Beenish: I am not an engineer or related to IT world, so my network was zero. I went back to school and got a certificate in my field that helped me build my network. So, going back to school for a degree or a certificate helps your confidence and also helps you build network.
Moderator– I agree, formal courses and even online courses can boost your skillset. It looks good on your LinkedIn too.
 
Question # 4
Moderator:  What was your first job and how did you find it?
Fatima: I recommend people to get the foot in the door job. Don’t spend too much time in finding the perfect dream job. Once you are a perfect candidate, you have worked hard and you prove yourself, you will gradually move up the ladder.  
Farah: I wanted to create my own path so I used the available network and got the foot in the door job. Use your Pakistani network, mentors from the community, set up mock interviews. These things helps a lot.
Fauzia: It is important to put yourself out there. I was once at a seminar of code.org and a friend of mine offered me a volunteer position. I took the job, it opened doors for me and improved my skillset.
 
Question: Audience
How to prep for an interview?
Fatima: Mock interviews is the way to go. Write down all question the interviewee can possibly ask and try to answer the questions. Amazon has a unique interview process. So, if you are applying at Amazon, meet people at Amazon and ask them about their experience. Also, UW has great resources, you can set up mock interviews. It is very important that you prepare an elevator pitch. Have a star approach in your introduction. Talk about the task – your action and then your approach.
Beenish: Having quick snap shots of your career highlights in your mind helps in an interview. Write your answers. Get questions from online resources and prepare/ refine them as much as you can. Practice practice.
Fauzia: At Perdue University they taught us to record our answers of the interview and then review the tape and see if you would hire yourself. Mock interviews are important. Ask your husband to interview you. Reach out to the community and specially professionals who are in that field.  
Modertor: I interviewed with serval companies I didn’t really care about to boost my confidence, so when I apply to the company I really want to go I feel prepared.
Fauzia: Just be careful if you are rejected too many times, your morale might be shaken.
Farah: I scheduled all mock interviews at interviewees work places. It gave me the experience and feeling of a real interview. For technical interviews you need to practice on whiteboard. When you are practicing on your own always use a white board.
 
Question : Audience
How do you do work life balance?
Beenish: There is no balance. Take your work with kids or vice versa. Work life integration. I sometimes take phone calls while my kids are playing in the park. It is tough. Just flow with it. It gets easy with time.
Fatima: I did my graduate degree with 3 kids. You need support. My friends looked at my kids while I went to school. My husband picked up the slack. You must lean on your support.
Beenish : You need to seek support.

Thank you everyone
for coming.
The group broke down into four smaller groups.
 
Returnship Resources
 
Company Programs:
Microsoft LEAP program: http://www.industryexplorers.com/
Big list of “Return to work programs” https://www.irelaunch.com/paidcorporateprograms , (look for Washington)
Booz Allen Hamilton program https://www.boozallen.com/e/culture/the-future-of-work-is-flexible-and-female.html
Boeing return to work program: http://www.boeing.com/careers/organizations/return-flight/  
 
Online Websites:
ReLaunchers: https://www.irelaunch.com/relaunchers
Offers courses
Rebootaccel: https://rebootaccel.com/job-board
Offers courses
Has job listings specifically for women returning to work after a break
Startup focused on Moms returning to work: https://themomproject.com/
PathForward: https://www.pathforward.org/
ReachHire: https://www.reachire.com/women/jobs
 
Learning & Continued Education Resources:
Online learning resources:
Lynda.com
Coursera.com
Udemy.com
Edx.org
Talks and books about returning to work:
“How to Get Back to Work After a Career Break,” by Carol Fishman Cohen
Carol Fishman Cohen hbr article: The 40 year old intern
Books: Back on the Career Track

Job postings: https://rebootaccel.com/job-board
 
Shared by a member
1. There is a program called Apprenti that can be helpful for people who are starting software development from zero to trying to return. https://apprenticareers.org/
2. Lynda.com is free with the King county public library system membership. Many people may not know that they can use it for free with a library card.
3. I talked about 100DayOfCode, more information is available here: https://www.100daysofcode.com/ Many people starting the challenge from May 1, including me.
3. My blog on algorithms: https://medium.com/@dabdulloeva
4. King county library branches has volunteer opportunity as tech tutor, where people can teach entry level classes like HTML, CSS, JS, Python. For this, they need to contact instruction@kcls.org or 425-369-3389.
5. Seattle Tech interviews meetup group has daily online leetcode practice. https://www.meetup.com/techinterviews
6. She'sCoding organization has weekly meetup on Cracking the Coding interview where women get together to practice technical coding interviews. This org has two chapters, one for Seattle meetup: https://www.meetup.com/shescoding-seattle, and one for Eastside here: https://www.meetup.com/shescoding-eastside/
7.Coding Practice session meetup group meets every week on Saturday or Sunday for 2 hours of algorithm practice in different public libraries in the Eastside. Run and attended by mostly Indian and Pakistani people. https://www.meetup.com/skillets/events/vqdzvqyzhbgb/
8. All of these meetups and orgs have slack channels with tons of support and resources.
I hope it helps other women like me.

